REVIEW ARTICLE
Microbiome, GvHD, and immune reconstitution in allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation
Daniela Weber1
, Misbah Tariq1
, Mette Hazenberg2,3
, Hendrik Poeck 1,4
and Florent Malard 5✉
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
The gut microbiota has emerged as a critical factor inﬂuencing outcomes following allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation
(alloHCT). Notably, disruptions to the intestinal microbiome—referred to as dysbiosis—have been strongly linked to the
development of acute graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD). The gut microbiome interacts closely with the host immune system,
inﬂuencing both immune reconstitution and alloHCT complications. As a result, microbiome-targeted strategies are being
investigated to improve outcomes and include antibiotic stewardship, prebiotic and diet intervention, probiotics including fecal
microbiota transfer (FMT) and postbiotics. These approaches are being investigated not only as a therapeutic intervention in
particular for aGVHD, but also as preventive strategies.
Bone Marrow Transplantation (2026) 61:385–394; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41409-026-02798-0
INTRODUCTION
Human microbiota, deﬁned as the community of microorganisms
that colonize humans and their collective genomes (the micro-
biome), is in close relationship with health and disease.
Importantly, microbiota and host coevolve from birth, leading to
a unique host–microbiome symbiosis in healthy individuals [1].
The 100 trillion bacteria of the human microbiota interact daily
with the skin, mouth, pharynx, respiratory system, urogenital tract,
and the digestive tract. The latter contains by far the largest
density and diversity of microorganisms. Gut microbiota dysbiosis,
the imbalance in the normal composition, diversity, or function of
the gut microbial communities, is associated with the disruption
of the host–microbiome symbiosis, that leads to alteration of the
gut barrier (most often permeability) [2] and disruption of
immunologic homeostasis. In the setting of hematological
malignancies this is particularly relevant since those patients
often experience numerous insults to the microbiome, such as
impaired nutritional intake and exposure to chemotherapy and
broad-spectrum antibiotics, that can lead to dysbiosis, disruption
of symbiosis and local and systemic inﬂammation [3]. In the last
decade, numerous studies investigated the interplay between gut
microbiome dysbiosis and outcomes of patients with hematolo-
gical malignancies. It became clear that there is a close relation-
ship between the gut microbiota and outcome after allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation (alloHCT) [4–6].
Acute GvHD is an immunological complication of alloHCT,
associated with high morbidity and mortality, particularly when
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is affected [7]. In the early 1970s and
1980s, data in murine models and later in clinical studies
suggested that intestinal microbiota play an important role in
the pathophysiology of acute GvHD [8, 9]. It was demonstrated
that alloHCT in germ-free mice as well as total or selective
decontamination with broad-spectrum antibiotics resulted in a
signiﬁcant reduction of GvHD-related mortality [8, 9]. Subsequent
experimental studies showed that manipulation of the intestinal
microbiota composition either by antibiotics such as Ampicillin or
by introducing potentially beneﬁcial bacteria such as Lactobacillus
signiﬁcantly modiﬁed intestinal inﬂammation and outcome of
transplant recipients [5, 10]. The progress of the research was
however impeded by the absence of methodologies to culture the
whole spectrum of anaerobic and aerobic bacteria. The recent
introduction of culture-independent techniques involving riboso-
mal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing ﬁnally enabled us to untangle
the complex relationship between gut microbiota, bacterial-
derived metabolites and host tissues and their signiﬁcant impact
on immune cells, immune reconstitution and GvHD pathogenesis
[11] the topic of this review.
RISK FACTORS IMPACTING MICROBIOME DYSBIOSIS AND
IMPACT OF MICROBIOME ON PATIENTS’ OUTCOME AFTER
ALLOHCT
Before and after alloHCT, the diversity of the intestinal microbiome
signiﬁcantly decreases over time. Disruption of the homeostatic
microbiota composition and, particularly, early intestinal dysbiosis,
is strongly associated with poor outcome [6, 12, 13]. In a large-
scaled multicenter study, similar microbial patterns characterized
by loss of commensals and domination by single bacterial taxa
such as Enterococci were associated with high transplant-related
mortality, independent of the institutes’ geographic locations and
practices [6, 14]. Intestinal dysbiosis creates a pro-inﬂammatory
milieu and leads to disruption of epithelial integrity. Epithelial
Received: 16 September 2025 Revised: 5 December 2025 Accepted: 27 January 2026
Published online: 4 February 2026
1
Clinic and polyclinic for Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. 2
Department of Hematology, Amsterdam University Medical Centres,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 3
Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 4
Leibniz Institute for Immunotherapy (LIT),
Regensburg, Germany. 5
Service d’Hématologie Clinique et Thérapie Cellulaire, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Sorbonne Université, INSERM UMRs 938, Paris, France.
✉email: ﬂorent.malard@inserm.fr
www.nature.com/bmt
1234567890();,: