damage is exacerbated by pretransplant conditioning, which
causes the release of intracellular molecules, damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs), while activation or destruction of
bacteria induces the release of pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) [7]. DAMPs and PAMPs act as danger signals to
activate antigen presenting cells, which are then responsible for
the activation of allogenic donor lymphocytes and acute GVHD [7].
Epithelial damage, bacterial translocation and inﬂammation are
the hallmarks of aGvHD development and at the origin of blood
stream infections and septicemias.
Alteration of the intestinal microbiota is caused by antibiotics
given either during leukemia remission-induction therapy or after
alloHCT, by dietary changes, by pre-transplantation conditioning
therapy and by the use of other medications. The majority of
alloHCT recipients is extensively exposed to prolonged prophy-
lactic and therapeutic antibiotics during episodes of neutropenia.
These are often broad-spectrum antibiotics that target obligate
anaerobic bacteria, typically producers of short-chain fatty acids
(SCFA) in the gut. Depletion of SCFA producing bacteria is
associated with expansion of opportunistic pathogens [12, 13, 15].
In addition, absence of normal dietary intake and prolonged
parenteral nutrition leads to loss of protective beneﬁcial bacteria
such as Blautia [16–18]. Finally, conditioning regimens including
chemotherapy and radiation, and immuno-suppressive medica-
tions to prevent GvHD may disrupt the sensitive equilibrium
between host and microbiota [19–22].
INTERPLAY BETWEEN MICROBIOME, IMMUNE CELL SUBSETS
AND GUT-DERIVED METABOLITES AFTER ALLOHCT
Intestinal microbiota are able to modify local and systemic
immunity either by direct interaction with immune cells or
indirectly via the production of microbial metabolites such as
SCFA like butyrate, bile acids, polyamines, and indoles binding to
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) [23].
Crosstalk between microbiota and immune cell subsets
The gut microbiome actively shapes immune reconstitution
following alloHCT by regulating the balance between regulatory
T cells (Tregs), pro-inﬂammatory T helper 17 (Th17) cells—the
predominant CD4+
T cell subsets in the lamina propria under
steady-state conditions and innate lymphoid cells (ILC). Microbial
diversity, speciﬁc bacterial taxa, and metabolite production play
crucial roles in maintaining this balance, inﬂuencing both GVHD
outcomes and immune recovery.
Tregs play a pivotal role in maintaining immune homeostasis
and promoting recovery, particularly in the context of gut
microbiome interactions. Speciﬁc commensal bacteria, such as
Bacteroides fragilis, further amplify Treg development via poly-
saccharide A (PSA)-dependent signaling, which primes dendritic
cells to foster Foxp3+ Treg induction [24]. Recent ﬁndings
highlight that these microbiota-induced Tregs not only expand
in number but also critically interact with alloreactive CD8+T cells
to directly suppress their allogeneic activation, thereby limiting
the severity of GvHD. Disruption of the microbiome leads to a
marked reduction in Tregs and their regulatory crosstalk with
alloreactive cytotoxic T cells, resulting in heightened GvHD
severity [25].
Th17 cells are a subset of pro-inﬂammatory T helper cells
characterized by their production of interleukin 17 (IL-17). Th17
play a key role in host resistance against intestinal pathogens and
promote systemic autoimmunity [26, 27]. Certain commensal
bacteria, including segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria (SFB) and
Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis, are known to drive Th17 differentia-
tion [28]. Studies in both human and murine models indicate that
higher levels of IL-17–producing donor-derived CD4⁺ T cells are
detected in cases of severe intestinal GvHD, where IL-17 enhances
tissue injury by promoting neutrophil inﬁltration and macrophage
activation [25, 29]. Microbiota-derived signals such as SFB-induced
IL-6 and IL-23 pathways further skew the Th17/Treg balance
toward inﬂammation, while loss of microbial diversity reduces
regulatory feedback mechanisms that normally limit Th17
expansion. Certain microbial metabolites, such as 3-oxo LCA (a
secondary bile acid), can inhibit Th17 cell differentiation and
mitigate GvHD, suggesting that both the composition and
metabolic function of the microbiota directly affect the Treg/
Th17 axis and GvHD outcomes [30].
ILCs are recently discovered heterogenous group of innate
immune cell specialized in the rapid secretion of cytokines and
chemokines to combat infection and promote mucosal tissue
repair [31]. ILC3s, a subset of ILCs, play a key role in gut immunity,
and their function is regulated by FfAR2, a receptor for microbial
metabolites [32]. FfAR2 activation enhances IL-22 production,
which strengthens the gut barrier and promotes epithelial healing.
Additionally, ILC3s suppress alloreactive T cell activation [33], help
monitor gut microbiota, and support early colonization resistance
through ID2-dependent IL-22 regulation [34]. In murine alloHCT
models, ILC3-derived IL-22 protects the intestinal stem cells, limits
epithelial damage, and enhances production of antimicrobial
peptides and mucins, all promoting effective epithelial repair and
reduced severity of GvHD [19].
Other important immune cells also contribute to immune
reconstitution and their interplay with the microbiota and its
derived metabolites are summarized in Table 1.
Gut-derived metabolites and immune reconstitution
Short-chain fatty acids (SCFA). The gut microbiota enhances
immune tolerance by fermenting dietary polysaccharide SCFA like
butyrate, propionate, and acetate, which have key immunomo-
dulatory effects. Butyrate regulates hematopoiesis by activating
toll-like receptor signaling in hematopoietic stem cells and
contributes to the overall restoration of immune cell numbers
[35]. Butyrate produced by Clostridium clusters (IV, XIVa, XVIII) and
Biﬁdobacterium, enhance Treg differentiation by inhibiting
histone deacetylases (HDACs) and maintaining Foxp3 expression,
thereby expanding colonic Treg populations, which are essential
for reducing inﬂammation and promoting mucosal repair [36].
Consistent with these ﬁndings, vorinostat, a pharmacological
HDAC inhibitor, has been shown to decrease inﬂammatory
cytokines, lower established GVHD biomarkers (such as Reg3
and ST2), and enhance Treg function, thereby reducing the
incidence and severity of acute GVHD in both preclinical and
clinical studies [37, 38].
Bile acids. Bile acids, synthesized by the liver and modiﬁed by gut
microbiota into secondary forms (e.g., lithocholic acid (LCA),
deoxycholic acid (DCA)), regulate immune responses via receptors
like farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and G-Protein Bile Acid-activated
Receptor (GPBAR). Secondary bile acids, such as 3-oxoLCA and
isoalloLCA, modulate the TH17/Treg balance: 3-oxoLCA inhibits
RORγt-driven TH17 differentiation, while isoalloLCA enhances
FOXP3+ Treg induction [30]. Prophylactic tauroursodeoxycholic
acid (TUDCA) administration reduced acute GVHD severity in
murine transplantation models by decreasing antigen presenta-
tion activity and preventing intestinal epithelial apoptosis,
independent of microbiome alterations [39].
Tryptophan metabolites. Tryptophan, an essential amino acid
derived primarily from dietary sources, is metabolized via three
interconnected pathways: kynurenine, serotonin, and indole
pathways. In the context of allo-HSCT, microbiota-derived
tryptophan metabolites play a crucial role in immune recovery.
Indole derivatives produced by commensals like Lactobacilli and
Proteobacteria activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR),
which regulates the IL-22/IL-10 axis, promotes Treg differentiation
and ILC homeostasis, and suppresses hyperinﬂammation [40].
D. Weber et al.
386
Bone Marrow Transplantation (2026) 61:385–394