pathogenesis of GvHD proceeds through direct and indirect
mechanisms. They can induce anti-inﬂammatory responses [29],
improve intestinal epithelial barrier integrity, help maintain
intestinal homeostasis and they can enhance anti-inﬂammatory
Treg and tissue-repair inducing ILC3 [25, 48–51]. Intestinal
commensals confer colonization resistance against entero-
pathogens by nutrient limitation and the production of bacter-
iocins and as such contribute to balanced gut homeostasis [52].
Recent data identiﬁed a microbiome signature of Lachnospiraceae
and Oscillospiraceae and their associated bacteriophages, that
correlated with the production of immunomodulatory metabolites
(IMMs) such as short chain and branch chain fatty acids and
interferon-I inducing metabolites. The presence of these IMMs
strongly correlated with alloHCT outcome [53].
Whereas the presence of SCFA-producing bacterial species was
found to be associated with protection against acute GvHD-
related mortality and the development of chronic GvHD [29, 54],
other bacterial taxa have been associated with more severe
disease. Loss of microbiome diversity is often accompanied with a
shift to Enterococcus domination, which is associated with an
increased risk of severe GvHD and GvHD-related mortality [4, 6]. In
murine models enterococcal administration aggravated GvHD
severity, demonstrating causality. Indeed, a diet free of lactose, a
substrate mainly utilized by enterococci, prevented enterococcal
overgrowth and reduced GvHD severity [14]. Similarly, the
administration of butyrate or butyrate producing bacteria
mitigated GvHD severity and improved transplant outcome in
murine GvHD [21].
These data suggest that the pathophysiology of acute GvHD
may depend on a complex interplay among various bacterial
species, their metabolites, intestinal homeostasis, barrier function
and immune tolerance. The most sensitive time period to interfere
is probably when dysbiosis has not yet led to immune
dysregulation, most likely in the immediate pre- and post-
transplant period. This is suggested amongst others by the impact
of timing of antibiotics.
MICROBIOME-TARGETED STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE
OUTCOMES
Antibiotic stewardship
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are an integral part of alloHCT care,
and frequently used to treat febrile infections, a major complica-
tion especially in the post-transplant neutropenic period. Addi-
tionally, prophylactic antibiotics have been routinely used aiming
total or selective gut decontamination primarily to prevent
infectious complications during aplasia but also to protect patients
from GvHD since early studies suggested that gut decontamina-
tion might reduce GvHD severity, improve survival and also
reduce neutropenic fever [8, 9].
However, the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics is a double-
edged sword, as it remains a major risk factor driving severe
intestinal dysbiosis, which is clearly associated with poor overall
survival and an increased risk for acute GvHD [12, 55]. Antibiotics
like carbapenems and piperacillin/tazobactam that suppress
commensal bacteria have been associated with increased GvHD-
related mortality, whereas antibiotics with commensal and
anaerobic sparing effects like cefepime or aztreonam were not
[56]. In mice, treatment with imipenem-cilastatin led to a
degradation of the protective mucus layer and disruption of the
intestinal barrier function. This has been attributed to speciﬁc
bacteria such as Akkermansia muciniphila, a mucus degrading
bacterium [56]. Interestingly, not only the type of antibiotics in
general but also the timing seems to be critical, as patients who
received antibiotics prior to the day of transplantation showed
loss of protective Clostridia and increased transplant related
mortality, compared to patients with later initiation of antibiotic
treatment [55].
Given the negative impact of early antibiotic use on transplant
outcome, clinical strategies for antibiotic stewardship have been
an area of active investigation aiming a more sophisticated use of
antibiotics in the setting of alloHCT. At a single transplant unit, the
change of antibiotic guidelines to a more restrictive use of
antibiotics particularly in cases with a high likelihood of cytokine
release syndrome (CRS), e.g., after anti-thymocyte globulin
therapy, led to reduced antibiotic administration in general, more
microbiome diversity and a trend towards a reduced incidence of
severe GI GvHD, without an increase in infectious complications
[57]. Thus, the development of strategies allowing better
differentiation between fever as a consequence of CRS and fever
due to real infection would be a valuable clinical approach for
optimal antibiotic stewardship.
A group of innovative new substances including Beta-lactam
cleaving enzymes, charcoal-based adsorbents or engineered
probiotics depict another promising option to maintain micro-
biome integrity and to mitigate dysbiosis associated risks. These
antibiotic neutralizing agents selectively decrease antibiotic
concentrations in the gut without affecting their therapeutic
efﬁcacy allowing the use of highly effective antibiotics for the
treatment of severe infections [58–62].
The clinical signiﬁcance of prophylactic antibiotics during the
alloHCT period is still an unsolved issue. After initial beneﬁcial
reports regarding GvHD severity and OS in a clinical study of the
Essen group using gut decontamination with ciproﬂoxacin and
metronidazole [9], these effects could not be conﬁrmed in follow-
up studies. In the meantime, there is an increasing number of
smaller clinical studies showing no protective effects of prophy-
lactic antibiotics on acute GvHD resulting in a heterogeneous use
of prophylactic gut decontamination across transplant centers, as
randomized prospective studies on antibiotic prophylaxis are still
missing [63–65].
In summary, these data describe paradoxic antibiotic effects in
alloHCT: broad-spectrum antibiotics induces luminal and mucosal
dysbiosis with negative effects on epithelial barrier integrity,
containment of pathobionts, and transplant outcome [66]. These
data seem to be contradictory to the old data reporting a reduced
incidence of GvHD in germfree mice and also to recent ﬁndings
indicating that microbiota suppression by antibiotics can posi-
tively interfere with bacterial translocation. Intensive conditioning
damages the intestinal epithelium and facilitates bacterial
translocation into the intestinal wall, which is ampliﬁed after loss
of epithelial barrier integrity due to T cell mediated apoptosis in
GvHD patients - a hallmark of GvHD initiation [67, 68]. Antibiotics
can either enhance or suppress T-cell mediated immunity,
depending on the context: While dysbiosis diminishes T-cell
regulation and increases GvHD susceptibility, suppression of
translocated bacteria dampens T-cell activation through reduced
co-stimulation mitigating GvHD. Thus, in alloHCT a more
sophisticated timing of antibiotics may supplement antibiotic
stewardship in general, and strategies preserving luminal and
mucosal eubiosis but preventing translocation may be needed
[66] allowing a better balance between infection reduction and
microbiota damage.
Probiotics, prebiotics, and postbiotics
Beside antibiotic stewardship, others strategies are under inves-
tigation to preserve or repair the microbiome in patients
undergoing alloHCT including prebiotic and dietary changes,
probiotics and fecal microbiota transfer, and postbiotic
supplements.
Prebiotics are indigestible carbohydrates selectively utilized by
host microorganisms. Riwes et al. conducted a phase 2 study to
evaluate the use of resistant potato starch (RPS) in 10 adults’
patients that received alloHCT [69]. RPS is a form of potato starch
that is practically not digested by human enzymes in the small
intestine [70]. It passes through to the large intestine largely intact,
D. Weber et al.
390
Bone Marrow Transplantation (2026) 61:385–394