where it undergoes fermentation by the oral and intestinal
microbiota. Consequently, it functions as a prebiotic, promoting a
healthy gut microbiota and potentially contributing to beneﬁts
like increased production of SCFA [70]. RPS was given daily from
day -7 to day 100. This pilot study established that administration
of RPS was feasible and tolerated by patients and translated in
signiﬁcantly higher fecal butyrate levels when participants were
on RPS than when they were not (p <0.0001). Nevertheless,
longitudinal changes in plasma metabolites compared to baseline
were independent of RPS (P <0.0001). Another resistant starch
(RS), Amyloﬁber SH, (corn starch with high amylose content) was
evaluated in combination with GFO, a prebiotics mixture
comprising glutamine, ﬁber, and oligosaccharide commercially
available in Japan [71]. In a prospective trial that included 49
patients and 142 matched historic controls, RS and GFO were
given from pretransplantation conditioning to day 28 after
alloHCT. Prebiotics intake was associated with maintenance of
gut microbial diversity and preservation of butyrate-producing
bacterial. In particular fecal butyrate concentration after alloHCT
was maintained or even increased in the prebiotics group. This
translated in a clinical beneﬁt with a signiﬁcantly lower cumulative
incidence of gastro-intestinal grade II-IV GvHD. The observation
that RS and GFO also reduced the incidence of aGVHD of the skin
suggests a systemic effect. Finally, Andersen et al. reported a pilot
study that compared standard enteral nutrition (n =10) with
prebiotic ﬁbre enteral nutrition (n=20) [72]. Microbial diversity
declined in both groups, however, in the prebiotic group a
signiﬁcant increase of the relative abundance of lactobacillus_C
rhamnosus (p= 0.022) and decreased expression of antibiotic
resistance genes was observed. Overall, the use of prebiotics
shows promising results, but larger randomized studies are
warranted to conﬁrm these ﬁndings. Regarding speciﬁc dietary
interventions in alloHCT, additional reports and studies are also
needed.
Probiotics are live microorganisms which, when administered in
adequate amounts, confer a health beneﬁt on the host. Probiotics
can consist of single symbiotic bacterial strains, of a consortium of
selected strains, may refer to engineered probiotics (genetic or
metabolic modiﬁcation of probiotic microorganisms) or to a full
ecosystem (fecal microbiota transfer, FMT). In the setting of
alloHCT, FMT is the most widely investigated approach. FMT
involves the transfer of fecal material from healthy donors to
restore gut microbial diversity and function. Initially established as
an effective treatment for Clostridioides difﬁcile infections resistant
to antibiotics [73], FMT has expanded into experimental applica-
tions for immune modulation, including overcoming resistance to
immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI), treatment of gastro-intestinal
(GI) aGVHD and improving outcomes after alloHCT. In ICI-resistant
melanoma patients, phase I clinical trials demonstrated that FMT
combined with anti-PD-1 therapy led to partial or complete tumor
responses in a subset of patients, highlighting its potential to
reverse immunotherapy resistance [74].
In the setting of GI-aGVHD, effective and safe use of FMT was
ﬁrst reported by Kakihana et al. in 2016 in 4 patients with steroid-
resistant (SR, n=3) and steroid-dependent (SD, n= 1) GI-aGVHD,
with 3 patients that achieve a complete response [75]. Those
results were further conﬁrmed by several case reports and small
series [76]. In a prospective single arm study, Van Lier and
colleagues used FMT in 15 patients with steroid refractory (SR;
n=6) or steroid dependent (SD; n =9) GI-aGVHD, with 10 patients
achieving a complete response [n =3 (50%) in SR and n= 7 (77%)
in SD] [77]. A phase 2a study evaluated a pooled allogeneic FMT
product, MaaT013, in patients with SR GI aGVHD (n=24) and with
an expanded access program another 52 patients were evaluated.
The day 28 overall response rate was 38% and 58% respectively
[78]. In all studies stools from responding patients demonstrated
higher microbiota richness and increased levels of beneﬁcial
bacteria, in particular butyrate producers, along with increased
levels of short-chain fatty acid and bile acids. A prospective phase
3 study evaluating MaaT013 in SR and ruxolitinib refractory GI
aGVHD is ongoing (NCT04769895). Finally, DeFilipp et al. eval-
uated FMT combine with combination with systemic corticoster-
oids in 10 patients with high-risk treatment naïve GI aGVHD, with a
CR rate at day 28 of 70% [79]. Signiﬁcant increase in tryptophan
metabolites and short-chain fatty acids were also observed within
the ﬁrst 7 days after FMT [79].
Other studies investigated FMT (autologous or allogeneic) to
restore microbiome composition after neutrophil engraftment
[80–82]. Those studies report signiﬁcant improvements in micro-
bial diversity and total white blood cell (WBC) counts during the
early post-engraftment period compared to controls [81]. A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial found that
FMT improved post-antibiotic recovery of microbiota diversity,
restored several depleted obligate anaerobic commensals, and
reduced the abundance of expanded genera like Enterococcus,
Streptococcus, Veillonella, and Dialister [83]. Finally, Peled et al.
reported as a congress abstract the preliminary results of a phase
1b study, evaluating SER-155, an oral investigational cultivated
microbiome therapeutic comprised of 16 bacterial Firmicutes
strains, given before conditioning and after neutrophil engraft-
ment [84]. Compared to placebo (n= 14), SER-155 (n=20) was
generally well tolerated with a safety proﬁle similar to placebo and
the incidence of bloodstream infections, a secondary endpoint,
was signiﬁcantly lower after treatment with SER-155.
It should be noted that alloHCT recipients are severely
immunosuppressed and at high risk of infectious complications.
Transmission of multidrug-resistant organisms from stool bank
products has led to fatal infections in immunocompromised
patients, including one documented death at Massachusetts
General Hospital of a patient who underwent HCT [85]. These
led to a strengthening of FMT donor screening protocols by the
health authorities’ agencies and international recommendations
have been issued for FMT donor screening [86]. It underscores the
continued importance of careful evaluation of FMT safety, in
particular with respect to infectious complications [87].
Future research should focus on optimizing the use of selected
bacterial consortia versus whole microbiota ecosystems, donor
selection, administration methods (e.g., oral capsules, duodeno-
scopy or colonoscopy/enema), and on the long-term safety to
maximize probiotics therapeutic potential in alloHCT settings. In
addition, for prospective trials testing interventions to maintain or
increase microbiome diversity, the choice of the primary clinical
endpoint to prove the intervention efﬁcacy is a challenge. Given
intestinal dysbiosis appears to play a role in the pathogenesis of
acute GVHD, the primary endpoint may be acute GVHD, with non-
relapse mortality as a secondary endpoint. Alternatively, using
overall survival as the primary endpoint would likely provide the
strongest evidence to determine whether maintaining or restoring
microbiome diversity translates into a clinical beneﬁt.
Postbiotics refer to a preparation of inanimate microorganisms
and/or their components [88]. Clinical data are very scarce with
only the results of a phase II study available as a congress abstract
[89]. Twenty patients ingested sodium butyrate (600mg × 2
capsules per day) from engraftment (day +14 to +21) until days
+90 to +100 and were compared to an historical control group,
with a signiﬁcantly lower incidence of grade III-IV aGVHD in the
postbiotics group. Randomized studies are needed to conﬁrm
these ﬁndings.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The gut microbiome is critical to post-transplantation immune
reconstitution, and its diversity and composition have been linked
to alloHSCT outcomes, particularly the development and severity
of aGvHD and the risk of opportunistic infections. Disruption of
microbial diversity—by conditioning regimens, antibiotics, or
D. Weber et al.
391
Bone Marrow Transplantation (2026) 61:385–394