                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D. Weber et al.
388


                   References
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Conversely, the kynurenine pathway, mediated by indoleamine




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AhR aryl hydrocarbon receptor, DCs dendritic cells, FMT fecal microbiota transplantation, Foxp3 forkhead box P3, GPR15 G protein-coupled receptor 15, GVHD graft-versus-host disease, HDAC histone deacetylase,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), contributes to immunosuppression by
                                                   [31, 34]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             depleting tryptophan and accumulating kynurenines that pro-
                                                                                                                                      [94]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mote Treg expansion while impairing effector T cells. Dysbiosis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             post-transplant alters tryptophan metabolism, reducing AhR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ligands and exacerbating GVHD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are also key media-




                                                                                                                                   D-lactate-producing probiotics; γδ T
                                                   AhR agonists (e.g., dietary indoles);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tors of this pathway, playing an essential role in maintaining
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             immune tolerance after allo-HSCT. MDSCs express IDO, which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             catalyzes tryptophan degradation into immunosuppressive kynur-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             enines that activate AhR signaling. This reciprocal interaction




                   Therapeutic Relevance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             promotes MDSC expansion and enhances their ability to suppress
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             alloreactive T cell responses, thereby attenuating GvHD severity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             while preserving graft-versus-leukemia effects. In addition, MDSCs



                                                   Alistipes consortia.                                                            cell boosters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             release arginase-1 and nitric oxide, further inhibiting T cell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             proliferation and supporting Treg induction. Together, these
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mechanisms deﬁne the tryptophan–MDSC axis as a central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pathway balancing immune tolerance and inﬂammation in GvHD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ILC3s type 3 innate lymphoid cells, IL interleukin, isoDCA iso-deoxycholic acid, isoalloLCA isoallo-lithocholic acid, LPS lipopolysaccharide, M1/M2 classically/alternatively activated macrophage phenotypes, NF-κB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [41].


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MICROBIOME AND IMMUNE RECONSTITUTION AFTER



                                                                                                                                      Early defense against pathogens;
                                                   Enhances mucosal barrier repair;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ALLOHCT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Immune reconstitution following alloHCT sets the stage for a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             successful transplant. A properly reconstituted immune system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             requires both innate and adaptive arms for defense against viral

                                                   regulates lymphoid tissue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and microbial pathogens, tissue repair, and beneﬁcial graft-vs-




                   Functional Impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             leukemia effects. Immune reconstitution is dependent on factors



                                                                                                                                      promotes tissue homeostasis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             including conditioning regimen, graft source and manipulation,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             transplant outcomes such as GVHD, and ﬁxed patient factors like

                                                   development.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             age-related thymic function. For adaptive immunity, numerical T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and B cell recovery typically occurs between 6 to 12 months, while
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             full reconstitution may take up to 2 years [6, 42]. In parallel, innate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             immunity reconstitutes along distinct timelines: NK cells and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             subsets of ILCs (ILC1 and ILC3) recover within weeks, whereas ILC2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells, NK cells, natural killer cells, PD-1 programmed cell death protein 1, PD-L1 programmed death-ligand 1, PSA polysaccharide A, RORγt retinoic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             may take years [43]. ILC, play key role in epithelial tissue repair and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             maintain a reciprocal relationship with the microbiome which is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             essential for their homeostasis in the gut [44].

                                                   AhR ligands (indole
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Emerging evidence is now revealing that the gut microbiota can

                   Key Metabolites/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             also impact immune recovery post-alloHCT in murine models and



                                                                                                                                      D-lactate, SCFAs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in patients (Table 2). Higher fecal microbial diversity in the early
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             post-transplant periods strongly associated with improved CD4+

                                                   derivatives), SCFAs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T-cell recovery, particularly in patients receiving CD34-selected
                   Mechanisms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             grafts and who rely on de novo lymphopoiesis [45]. In contrast,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             low diversity correlates with increased GVHD, infections, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mortality.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                In addition, speciﬁc colonization patterns and microbial nutrient




                                                   Alistipes spp. activate AhR in ILC3s to
                                                                                                                                                                            Lactobacillus spp. modulate γδ T cell
                                                                                                                                      Microbiota-derived D-lactate primes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             interactions have been associated with immune deregulation.

                                                                                             Dysbiosis reduces ILC3-mediated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mono-domination, where a single taxon comprises more than




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    acid–related orphan receptor gamma t, SCFAs short-chain fatty acids, SFB segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria, TLR toll-like receptor, Tregs regulatory T cells.
                   Crosstalk with Gut Microbiota
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30% of the microbial community, is a common feature during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             such periods, particularly during phases like perineutrophil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             engraftment [6]. Dietary lactose has been identiﬁed as a key


                                                                                             epithelial repair and antimicrobial                                            trafﬁcking to gut mucosa through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             driver of Enterococcus expansion, with lactose malabsorption




                                                                                                                                      γδ T cells for IL-17 production.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             further impairing microbial clearance [46]. Clinically, early dom-



                                                   produce IL-22.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             inance of Enterococcus correlates with CD4⁺ lymphopenia and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             increased risk of bloodstream infections. In contrast, high
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             abundance of beneﬁcial commensals such as Blautia has been

                                                                                             peptide production.                                                            GPR15 signaling.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             associated with accelerated recovery of CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             enhanced antiviral immunity, and reduced risk of leukemia relapse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [47]. Moreover, the presence of butyrate-producing taxa—includ-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ing members of Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae—has

       continued
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             been associated with robust B cell reconstitution and intestinal IgA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             production, key to mucosal defense [42].
                   Immune Cell

                                                                                                                                   γδ T Cells
      Table 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MICROBIOME AND GVHD
                   Type                            ILC3s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The impact of bacterial metabolites that are normally involved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in epithelial repair and immunological regulation on the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bone Marrow Transplantation (2026) 61:385 – 394
