GUT MICROBES
2026, VOL. 18, NO. 1, 2631224
https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2026.2631224


REVIEW ARTICLE

The gut microbiome in graft-versus-host disease: mechanisms of immune
modulation and therapeutic approaches
Adonai Blessington Mosesa,b                         and Albert C. Yehb,c
a
 Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; bTranslational Science and Therapeutics Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, USA; cDivision of Hematology and Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


    ABSTRACT                                                                                                                        ARTICLE HISTORY
                                                                                                                                    Received 17 October 2025
    Graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) remains a major complication of allogeneic hemato-
                                                                                                                                    Revised 1 January 2026
    poietic stem cell transplantation and occurs when T cells from the donor graft target                                           Accepted 9 February 2026
    recipient-derived antigen on host tissue. The involvement of the gastrointestinal (GI)
    tract drives morbidity and mortality—not coincidentally, the GI tract also harbors the                                          KEYWORDS
    most complex and abundant human microbial reservoir. In this review, we first revisit                                           Graft-versus-host disease;
    how the microbiota initiates, propagates, and protects against GvHD in the context of                                           GVHD; stem cell
                                                                                                                                    transplantation; bone
    both innate and adaptive immunity. Historically, the impact of the microbiota on GvHD
                                                                                                                                    marrow transplantation; gut
    has been ascribed primarily to the activation of innate immunity, setting the stage for                                         microbiota; microbiome
    donor alloreactivity. Although established models of GvHD focus on donor–host
    genetic disparity as the principal driver of donor T-cell activation, commensal microbes
    in the GI tract, whose collective gene content exceeds that of the human genome by
    more than two orders of magnitude, constitutes an immense and poorly understood
    source of potential T-cell antigens. We next discuss the evolution of therapeutic
    approaches aimed at modifying the microbiota to improve GvHD outcomes, incorpo-
    rating over 40 clinical studies spanning the last 40 years, from broad decontamination
    strategies to pre/probiotic approaches and targeted ecosystem replacement, including
    fecal microbiota transplantation.




Introduction
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) represents a curative approach for a range of
hematologic malignancies. However, its clinical use is often limited by graft-versus-host disease (GvHD), a
potentially life-threatening complication that results from major and minor histocompatibility mismatches
between the donor and host,1 culminating in the attack of host tissue by the adaptive immune response of
the donor. Involvement of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract represents the most morbid form of acute
GvHD,2 and initial observations over half a century ago demonstrated that depletion of the GI flora in
gnotobiotic mice significantly decreased GI GvHD.3,4 Early enthusiasm for GI decontamination as a
preventative approach led to several single-center clinical studies in the 1980s and 1990s that demonstrated
the potential impact of environmental decontamination including the use of oral antibiotics to reduce
GvHD risk.5-8 However, with the adopotion of calcineurin inhibitiors to prevent GvHD, the practical
difficulty of achieving strict decontamination in the clinical setting, lack of nuanced mechanistic insight
and limited ability to examine individual microbial taxa, and push for antibiotic stewardship hindered
sustained adoption of using broad spectrum antibiotics as a preventative measure.
   With the increasing availability of bacterial genomic sequencing in the mid-2000s, the initial brute force
approach of depleting the microbiota as a single entity would yield to the concept of preventing dysbiosis,
characterized by the loss of apparently beneficial, often anaerobic commensal bacteria associated with
favorable GvHD outcomes9-12 and expansion of pathobionts associated with increased GvHD.13-15 Broad
GI decontamination that impact anaerobic bacteria was thought to reduce beneficial commensal


CONTACT Albert C. Yeh      ayeh@fredhutch.org       Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, 1100 Fairview Ave N. S2-204, Seattle, 98109, WA, USA
  Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2026.2631224.
© 2026 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow
the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.
