2      A. B. MOSES AND A. C. YEH


organisms,16 and the emphasis shifted away from antibiotic utilization toward selective microbial
reconstitution. A 2020 landmark study with the largest patient cohort to date—examining 8,767 fecal
samples from 1,362 patients undergoing allogeneic transplant—highlighted this concept and demonstrated
that a reduction of alpha diversity in the GI microbiota and domination of specific taxa at the time of
neutrophil engraftment were linked to GvHD mortality. The challenge now became clarifying cause–effect
relationships of individual bacterial taxa's effects on outcomes. Additional studies examining specific
enzymatic11,13,15 and metabolic pathways9,17,18 have identified novel mechanisms by which individual
microbes mediate or protect from GvHD. Modern clinical approaches emphasize targeted microbial
interventions aimed at preserving or expanding beneficial commensal anaerobes and include the utiliza-
tion of narrow-spectrum antibiotics,19 prebiotic support,20,21 and post-transplant microbiota manipula-
tion, including fecal-microbiome transplantation,22-25 to mitigate GvHD risk.
   Despite extensive preclinical insight and efforts at clinical translation over the past several decades, however,
standard practice guidelines for GvHD prophylaxis in the United States and Europe do not currently
recommend routine modulation of the GI microbiota,26,27 reflecting the complexity in deconvoluting the
multiple mechanisms that co-exist in promoting or reducing GvHD risk as well as therapeutic challenges in
implementing and sustaining targeted microbiota changes. In this review, we summarize recent mechanistic
insights into how the microbiota shapes GvHD pathogenesis as well as current therapeutic strategies, high-
lighting the need to understand the microbiota composition in the context of donor and recipient immunity.


Microbial mechanisms of immune modulation
The broad impact that microbial organisms have on acute GvHD is illustrated by augmenting the widely
cited three-step model of acute GvHD pathophysiology proposed by Ferrara et al.28 While this decades-old
paradigm has primarily attributed the role of the microbiota in activating the innate immune response (phase
1), we now understand that the microbiota affects all three phases in the GvHD pathway, including
stimulating antigen presentation, shaping the T-cell response, and exacerbating host tissue injury (Figure 1).


Phase 1: microbial exposure and the innate immune response
Cytotoxic conditioning prior to transplantation remains critical for successful donor cell engraftment and
prevention of graft rejection but also results in tissue damage. The subsequent release of damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs) and exposure to microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) is central
to the pathogenesis of GvHD and the initiation of the innate immune response28 (Figure 1A). Evidence
that the gastrointestinal microbiota can impact tissue integrity following total body irradiation (TBI) was
reported as early as the 1960s, when work in murine models demonstrated that the lifespan of the
intestinal epithelium is reduced in conventional vs. germ-free mice.29 Mechanistic insight gleaned from
murine experiments in the 1990s demonstrated that tissue injury following TBI enabled the translocation
of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a prototypical MAMP, from damaged intestinal mucosa, which directly
amplified GvHD. Conditioning regimen intensity augments the host innate immune response by increas-
ing macrophage production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF),5 which is further amplified by LPS
exposure30,31 via toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling.32 Exposure to LPS also drives donor cell production
of TNF, as the utilization of LPS-resistant donor grafts results in diminished GvHD.33
   Concurrently, other MAMPs were identified that activate the innate immune response through pattern
recognition receptors34 including the cell wall components lipoteichoic acid and peptidoglycan, which
activate TLR235,36 and intracellular stimulation of NOD1/2,37,38 flagellin/TLR5,39 and CpG-containing
DNA/TLR9.40 Commensal bacteria subsequently drive the expression of IL-1β, a potent immune-
stimulatory cytokine, which lies downstream of the TLR/NF-kB axis.41 IL-1β is expressed predominantly
by host dendritic cells (DCs) early post-transplant followed by donor DCs, and its production was abrogated
following gut decontamination prior to transplant. DNA-mimicking CpG substrates also accelerated GvHD
via TLR9 ligation of host antigen-presenting cells42 and were not shown to have an effect on TLR9- or
MyD88-knockout mice. Neutrophil infiltration in the ileum following transplantation was dependent on
local microbial flora and was absent in germ-free mice.43 In contrast to the introduction of wild-type
neutrophils, TLR-deficient neutrophils mitigated GvHD severity. Similarly, gut decontamination prevented
