                                                                                                       GUT MICROBES        3




Figure 1. GvHD pathogenesis emphasizes the microbiota‒immune axis. This diagram augments the classic three-step
model of GvHD pathophysiology proposed by Ferrara et al.: conditioning-induced epithelial injury, antigen presentation,
and the donor T-cell response, within the context of microbiota exposure. (A) Phase I: tissue damage from conditioning
releases uric acid, ATP, and other danger signals that, together with microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs),
activate host antigen-presenting cells (APCs), and inflammatory myeloid cells through TLR and NLRP3 signaling. (B) Phase
II: activated APCs present both host alloantigen and microbial antigens, while microbial metabolites—including short-
chain fatty acids (SCFAs), secondary bile acids, indole derivatives, and tryptophan catabolites—modulate the differentia-
tion of Th1, Th17, and Treg subsets. (C) Phase III: tissue injury is amplified by ongoing microbial translocation and loss of
epithelial barrier integrity, with mucous- and junction-degrading taxa further promoting inflammation. The outer ring
(light blue) highlights representative microbial functions that modulate each phase, including SCFA producers that
support epithelial integrity and promote Treg expansion along with secondary bile acids, tryptophan-metabolizing
bacteria that induce IL-22 via AhR, mucin-degrading organisms that weaken the epithelial barrier, and MHC class
II–inducing taxa that enhance antigen presentation. Green arrows denote pathways associated with protection from
GvHD, while red arrows indicate mechanisms that exacerbate disease. Adapted from Ferrara et al. (28).

the ability for neutrophils to migrate to mesenteric lymph nodes (mLNs) and activate CD4 T cells in a
MHCII-peptide dependent manner.44
   Exposure to MAMPs during the conditioning phase of HSCT provided the initial biological insight for
how microbial decontamination resulted in decreased GvHD risk. While there is strong evidence that this
pathway plays a critical role in GvHD initiation, total sterilization, while compelling in theory, remains
impractical. A modern understanding of the GI microbiota also suggests that protective factors attributed
to specific bacterial taxa would be lost to broad decontamination. Nonetheless, in the absence of mitigating
factors, MAMP exposure offers a clear pathway to explain why domination of certain pathobionts, such as
Escherichia coli may aggravate GvHD.


Phase 2: adaptive immunity—how microbes shape the donor T-cell response
While the classic GvHD paradigm emphasizes genetic mismatch (either major or minor antigen differ-
ences between donor and host) as the source of donor T-cell reactivity, this underestimates the potential
