4      A. B. MOSES AND A. C. YEH


pool of antigens presented to donor T cells (Figure 1B). An estimated 1012 commensal microbes reside in
the human gastrointestinal tract,45 and insights over the past two decades have proven that microbes not
only shape how T cells are polarized but also dictate the clonotypic response in the gastrointestinal tract
during homeostasis, infection, and inflammation.46-54 However, much of the understanding of T-cell
responses to microbes has been derived outside of the HSCT context. Allogeneic transplantation is unique
due to the introduction of donor T cells, which are primed by the donor but not the recipient microbiota.
Recent evidence has demonstrated that the recognition of microbial peptides can directly impact GvHD, as
the expansion of microbiota-specific T cells from the donor graft, which target MHC II peptides derived
from bacterial flagellin or Clostridium savagella in the recipient GI tract, exacerbated GvHD in murine
models harboring respective commensal organisms.46 How donor T cells respond to recipient microbial
antigens in the clinical setting and the subsequent impact on clinical outcomes remain poorly understood.
Here,we propose a framework in thinking about how microbes shape the donor T-cell response by first
examining microbiota-reactive T cells in the donor graft (Figure 2).

Donor memory T cells are shaped by the donor microbiota
Peripheral blood CD4 T-cell reactivity to bacterial species is normal and has been demonstrated in both
murine and human context covering multiple microbial taxa.53,55,56 Microbiota-specific memory T cells in
circulation that react to heat-inactivated Escherichia, Lactobacillus, Bifidobaterium, Faecalibacterium,
Bacteroides, Roseburia, Ruminococcus, Salmonela, and Clostridium comprising up to 0.4% of CD4+
T cells per taxa have been reported in healthy inividuals.55 Phenotypic diversity in this setting can also be
seen by a broad range of T-cell responses to microbial peptides, in which numerous predicted bacterial
epitopes were identified to elicit a combination of IFNγ, IL-10, or IL-17 responses from 40 patient
peripheral blood samples.56
   Following introduction of the donor graft in HSCT, we posit that microbiota-specific memory T cells
may thus play a protective or pathogenic role depending on whether they encounter cognate peptide
presented on the proper MHC II allele and their polarization state (Figure 2). For the first to occur, the
cognate donor MHC II allele must also be present in the recipient. Second, T-cell polarization depends on
the donor environment and exposure to specific microbes. For example, anaerobic bacteria such as
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii that produce short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) experimentally induce Treg
differentiation,57 and IL-10 producing CD4+ T cells have been identified reactive to F. prausnitzii in
human peripheral blood.55 Thus, a donor graft containing F. Prausnitzii-specific T cells could play an
immunosuppressive/protective role in GvHD biology if they encounter cognate antigens in the recipient
microbiota. Clinically, this hypothesis is consistent with the observation that reconstitution of commensal
anaerobes known to produce SCFA appears to reduce GvHD risk. Additionally, the optimal donor with
regards to harboring regulatory microbiota-specific T cells may be the one with the most similar
commensal microbiota composition in the proper HLA context (e.g. matched transplant), as this would
maximize the chance of cognate recognition.

Naïve donor T-cell recognition of microbial peptides is likely to promote GVHD during HSCT
The majority of donor T cells are naïve, and a subset of these could be activated by commensal microbial
peptides in the recipient in an MHC-matched or mismatched context. As the peri-transplant phase is
characterized by excess inflammatory cytokine production, including IL-12, IFNγ, and IL-6 from macro-
phages, DCs, and other alloreactive T cells, in response to tissue injury and DAMP/MAMP exposure, naïve
T cells that recognize cognate microbial antigens are most likely to be skewed toward Th1 or Th17
phenotypes that contribute to GvHD pathology (Figure 2).
   This hypothesis is well-supported by evidence outside of the HSCT literature. T-cell mediated tolerance
to commensal organisms is contextual, as proinflammatory cues shift the balance towards a pathogenic
response. Acute gastrointestinal infection with orally administered Toxoplasma gondii elicited the
activation and Th1 differentiation of flagellin-targeting intestinal T cells directed at commensal
Clostridium XIVa bacteria that persist as long-term memory T cells.47 Peripheral induction of colonic
Tregs with TCR repertoires distinct from those of Tregs of other tissue types was demonstrated for
Clostridiales and Paraacteroides, for example, although the same Treg clonotypes, when adoptively
transferred predominantly as Foxp3− T cells, induced experimental colitis in Rag1−/− hosts.58 Similarly,
