6      A. B. MOSES AND A. C. YEH


higher risk of GvHD. For MHC-matched transplants, exposure of naïve donor T cells to novel microbial
antigens in the recipient risk pathologic microbial T-cell expansion. With improvements in GvHD
outcomes and prophylaxis,60 particularly with regimens that blunt the initial expansion and activation
of alloreactive donor T cells across both donor-recipient matched and mismatched settings,61-64 the
microbial-driven donor T-cell response may play an increasingly significant role in restoring immune
homeostasis in the intestinal tract.


Phase 3: impact of the microbiota on host tissue injury and susceptibility
The final effector phase of GvHD pathogenesis amplifies local tissue injury, further propagating the
underlying inflammatory cycle.28 Several microbial-related mechanisms have been shown to contribute to
host tissue injury or protection (Figure 1C). Microbial byproducts such as LPS that stimulate macrophage-
dependent TNF release can directly result in tissue injury.65 Metalloprotease secretion found in taxa such
as Enterococcus, which can degrade tight junction proteins and increase intestinal permeability,13,66 can
also increase susceptibility to tissue injury. Microbe-derived bile acids that mitigate farnesoid X receptor
activation was shown to inhibit proliferation and cytokine production of donor T cells in pre-clinical
transplant models, and GVHD patients harbored a reduction in microbe-derived bile acids upon disease
onset.67
   Understanding the spatialtemporal axis of exposure to microbial byproducts along the cycle of GvHD is
needed for effective clinical translation. Production of butyrate, a microbial SCFA metabolite that is
particularly abundant in Clostridia has perhaps received the most attention for promising its ability to
preserve epithelial cell integrity as an energy source for enterocytes12,68 and induce intestinal Tregs,69
which have been recently reviewed.70,71 However, butyrate can also suppress intestinal stem cells prolifer-
ation and its potentially beneficial effect blunted if exposed to the intestinal crypts.72 Microbial catabolism
of dietary tryptophan generates indole derivatives that activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a
transcription factor that promotes IL-22 production by innate lymphoid and T cells to enhances epithelial
regeneration and barrier repair.73 Preclinical models suggested that absence of the enzyme indoleamine 2,
3-dioxygenase worsened GvHD and augmented the donor T-cell response, but production of urinary
indole metabolites have also been associated with worse GvHD outcomes in a study of 54 patients74 and
was correlated with steroid-refractory disease.
   Another major challenge that confronts studying complex microbial ecosystems in GvHD is under-
standing how individual bacterial mechanisms that influence susceptibility to tissue injury interact in
concert. Recent studies have demonstrated that degradation of the protective mucus layer in the intestinal
tract provides another key pathway for aggravating GvHD. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, which expands
in the gastrointestinal tract following treatment with carbapenem antibiotics,15 upregulates the ability to
degrade mucin glycans and thins the colonic mucosal layer, increasing susceptibility to intestinal injury.15
Similarly, Akkermansia muciniphilia, another commensal organism that also possesses mucus-degrading
capabilities, expanded following antibiotic treatment in murine models and was correlated with clinical
GvHD.75 Conversely, the beneficial effects of Bacteroides ovatus were linked to its ability to metabolize
dietary polysaccharides, which suppress the mucus-degrading capabilities of other bacteria, including B.
thetaiotaomicron and A. muciniphilia and reduce GvHD-related mortality.11
   Compounding the complexity of this process, the tug-of-war between individual microbial species exist
can vary across multiple phenotypic axes. For example, bacteria taxa increases sensitivity to GvHD by
inducing MHC class II expression in the intestinal epithelium, while other taxa can suppress MHC class II
expression.76 MHC class II inducers include well-studied species such as C. savagella in murine models
that would align with previously observed phenotypes. However, B. thetaiotaomicron in this context was
shown to suppress epithelial MHC class II expression and therefore diminish the risk of tissue injury,
contrary to its role as a mucin-degrader.
   Clinically, it would be most practical to focus on reconstituting the posttransplant microbiota based on
the functional classification of taxa that maximize beneficial effects (e.g. SCFA producers) and minimize
known detrimental effects such as the ability to degrade mucin or augment the antigen presentation
machinery, as exemplified above. Rather than focusing on reconstituting individual microbial strains
where durable engraftment can often pose a challenge, a functional emphasis provides a strong rationale
